Electoral districts are an important element of electoral systems. Simply put, electoral districts are competition arenas where political parties compete to win representative seats, as well as political representation arenas between citizens and political parties. A term known in relation to electoral districts is ‘boundary delimitation’, which refers to the process of forming electoral districts. Boundary delimitation plays a significant role in the plurality majority electoral system and the proportional representation electoral system, where it maintains the proportionality of the number of representative seats allocated to an electoral district, as well as upholding the fairness principle in an election.

The proportionality of the citizens to seat ratio in an electoral district is the main objective of the boundary delimitation process to achieve the ‘one person, one vote, one value’ (OPOVOV) principle, ensuring the cohesiveness and integrality of administrative regions, as well as building political, social, and cultural ties between voters and their representatives. The problem is that boundary delimitation often results in electoral districts that are disproportionate, or even actively contradictory with the principle of fair election. For example, cases of malapportionment and gerrymandering, where electoral districts are intentionally designed to benefit certain election participants.

Therefore, it’s important for boundary delimitation to follow the standards and basic principles of electoral districting. This knowledge resource aims to act as a guideline for those who would be conducting boundary delimitation in line with the principles of electoral districting. Aside from discussing concepts and theories, this knowledge resource will also explain practical steps in the process of boundary delimitation, including the experience of several countries.