The Constitutional Monarchy of Malaysia implements a two-chamber system in their national legislatives: Senate and Parliament. The senate has 29 members, 43 of whom are appointed by the king and 26 appointed from the regional legislatives. Therefore, Senate members are not selected through a direct election. A direct election is held to select 219 members of the parliament³⁹. 

The Dewan Rakyat (Parliament) Election⁴⁰ is held using the first past the post plurality system based on single-member constituencies. There are 13 states and 3 federal regions in Malaysia⁴¹. 

The Parliament’s electoral districts are formed and recommended by the Election Commission. There are 6 main rules governed by the federal constitution:

1. Electoral redistricting cannot be done more than once every eight years; 
2. Electoral redistricting simulation isn’t done for more than two years;
3. Electoral district boundaries must pay attention to the federal region boundaries;
4. Consider the available administrative facilities available at the electoral districts;
5. The number of voters in every electoral district must be more or less the same, unless there are considerations of difficult voter access and other losses faced by rural electoral districts, the magnitude of a different district must be given to that electoral district⁴²;
6. Attention must be paid to the discomforts that come with electoral districting, and the cohesiveness of local communities must be considered.

The following is a mechanism on electoral redistricting in Malaysia:

1. The Election Commission publishes the electoral redistricting designs on a State Gazette, and it’s published on at least one newspaper distributed in each electoral district;
2. A copy of electoral district design is open for assessment in every electoral district;
3. Feedback on the electoral district design is given one month after the announcement from the Election Commission, and the Commission receives representatives (either state government, local authorities, or a body consisting of a hundred members or more whose names are listed on the current voter list of the respective electoral district) who object to the electoral district design;
4. The Commission investigates the recommendations of stakeholders;
5. If the Election Commission revises the recommended designs after issuing a notice, the Commission will obey the revised designs as if there is no previously issued notice, so long as there’s no need to hold more than two local investigations on the design.

After completing the procedure, the Election Commission then submits the recommended electoral district design to the Prime Minister. The recommendation contains an overview of electoral redistricting in light of electoral districting principles and names of the experts that support the design or names of the experts who state that no redistricting is necessary.

After the recommendation is submitted to the Prime Minister, the Election Commission presents the recommendation⁴³ to the Parliament. If the design is approved at the Parliament through a simple majority vote, the Prime Minister must submit the recommendation to His Royal Majesty.

The rules in the federal constitution that allows the rural district magnitude creates a disproportionality of district magnitudes. The politicization of district magnitude determination by the ruling party undermines the “one man, one vote, one value” principle that is crucial to ensure equal voting rights in elections.

ACE Project reported that the *Barisan Nasional* coalition that has been in power for years has schemed with the Election Commission⁴⁴ to form electoral districts that are in line with the party coalition interests, specifically the United Malays National Organization (UMNO). Rural electoral districts that are constitutionally allowed to receive bigger seat allocations are largely populated by Malay natives that support *Barisan Nasional*. As a result, disproportionality of electoral district magnitudes and seat allocation causes an inequality of voting right and benefits parties under *Barisan Nasional*.

In the March 2004 Elections, for example, *Barisan Nasional* obtained a national vote of 60 percent, but won 90 percent of the parliamentary seats. On the other hand, opposition parties that won 40 percent of the votes only obtained 10 percent of the seats.
