The first thing that needs to be done is to examine the electoral legal framework or other regulations that govern electoral districting. There are several aspects of questions that need to be answered from the existing legal framework on the boundary delimitation process: 

> a. Has the electoral legal framework governed the number of legislative seats both nationally and locally, which will be turned into electoral districts? The number of parliamentary seats is important to know upfront, as this number will later be apportioned to electoral districts.

> b. Does the electoral legal framework govern the geographical aspect or the regions that should be turned into electoral districts in an election? For example, for a national legislative election, the regions allowed to become electoral districts are provinces or states, while for local legislative elections at the provincial or state level, the districts are cities in that area. 

> c. Does the electoral legal framework govern the population number or voter number data source in the process of seat apportionment? 

> d. Does the electoral legal framework govern specific regional boundaries that are allowed or disallowed to be formed into electoral districts? For example, considering the access to road infrastructure or communication networks that connect the regions, rivers and mountains to ensure the contiguousness and compactness of the region. 

> e. Does the electoral legal framework govern minimum and maximum limits of the number of seat allocation to be apportioned to an electoral district? For example, in Indonesia’s case, one electoral district must have at least 3 seats and at most 10. 

> f. Does the electoral legal framework govern the time interval and seat reallocation or electoral redistricting? For example, electoral redistricting following the citizen census cycle. 
